In this video I'm going to talk about virtual coin tosses.
You are going to learn about generating binary random distributions which is mimicking the results of
flipping a coin.
It can be a fair coin or a biased coin.
And I'm also going to give you a little bit of an introduction into the pandas module and in particular
the pandas data frame pandas is a module that's often used for organizing data for example in statistics.
So let's just switch to Python and begin immediately.
All right so num pi and Matt Platt lib.
We will also use pandas but I will get to that later.
So let's say we want to simulate a coin toss.
Well how do we do that to simulate a coin toss.
We want to generate a number that's going to correspond to heads or tails so a binary outcome we can
do that by generating a number that is 1 or 0.
Now there's multiple ways that you can generate integers.
You can use for example the rand int function in num pi.
But for reasons that will become clear momentarily I'm going to use the random that rand function so
you will remember from previously in this course that the rand function like this generates numbers
that are randomly picked and uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.
So for example that gives us you know all these possible numbers.
So what I'm going to do now is say that the random number greater than point five.
And so the idea is that if I run this code lots and lots of times then approximately 50 percent of the
time it's going to be true and approximately 50 percent of the time it's going to be false.
So this would be like flipping a fair coin.
So like a real coin.
Now we can make this an unfair coin by just changing this number.
So let's say point six.
So now we expect in the long run.
So flipping this coin many many many times or generating many many random numbers that 40 percent of
the time it's going to return true.
And 60 percent of the time it's going to return false.
And that's because 40 percent of the time this number is going to be by chance it's going to randomly
be greater than point six.
OK.
So let's create some variables here.
So I will call this fair coin equals point five and let's call this the bias coin equals point six.
And what I'm gonna do is loop through a number of trials let's say 10 trials.
So I'm going to let's see I'll start by initializing the results matrix.
So that's going to be a matrix of zeros and it's going to be two by the number of trials.
And the two here corresponds to flipping the fair coin and flipping the biased coin.
So now I'm going to loop through all of these trials and essentially do an experiment for i in range
0 2 and trials of course.
You can also leave out the 0 if you like.
I'm going to say that the results for the first coin and the IMF experiment the ice trial in our experiment
is going to be basically that code that I just showed.
So Rand greater than fair coin.
And then here do a little copy pasting this is going to be the biased coin.
And here we put the result in the second row of this results matrix.
So run through the code.
Make sure we don't get any coding errors which we don't.
And now I'm just gonna plot this.
So how should we make a plot of this.
Well what I'm going to do is plot the experiment trial on the x axis and the outcome on the y axis.
So the outcome is going to be heads or tails or in this case true or false or 1 or 0.
So let's start by writing plot results and we want the first row like this and let's actually just see
what this looks like so far.
Okay so here we get a line.
So this means that when I ran this experiment we got I don't know if 0 is heads or tails but let's pretend
that this is tails and this is heads.
So we got tails heads tails heads heads heads and then some more tells here at the end.
Now it's not really so easy to see all the individual flips the individual outcomes and also the line
is a little misleading because it's not like we got an outcome of point five at experiment and no trial
no point five.
So I'm going to change this to be a square and this is looking a little bit better.
I'm going to set the marker size to be a bit larger.
Okay so this is for the fair coin so let's put a label in here.
This was the fair coin and then I'm gonna copy and paste this for the bias coin.
So let's see.
Then this is going to be from the second row or index 1.
OK.
So what's going on here.
It looks like we only have exactly three results for the fair coin.
But actually what's happening is that these are being plotted exactly on top of each other.
So that makes it hard to see.
So what I'm going to do is actually change the y axis coordinates here a little bit so I'm gonna say
basically just kind of add an offset.
So this is going to be minus point 0 5.
And here I will offset the biased coin by plus point 0 5.
So now it's easy to see the results for the fair coin and for the biased coin.
Now there's nothing particularly special about the number point 0 5.
You could try different numbers you know maybe point 0 2.
These are just numbers that I tried and I thought that they looked pretty good.
Okay.
So a few other things I want to change because you know there isn't really a value of point eight.
There's only.
Heads or tails.
So I'm going to change the Y tick so appeal to the Y ticks.
And first of all we only want to show the values 0 and 1.
We don't want to show any of these values and then I'm going to change the labels to be tails and heads.
All right.
This is starting to look better and there's a few more things I want to do.
So first of all there's an awful lot of white space in here.
What I am going to do is adjust the y axis limit.
So why Lim let's set this to B minus point five to one point five.
And essentially that's just going to give us some extra padding at the bottom and the top.
So it's a bit more visible and then I think the last thing I'm going to do is say peel t the X label
is the flip number.
So this is the simulation of flipping a fair coin and a biased coin.
And now this is actually a pretty interesting result here.
The question is without putting on the label would you be able to guess.
So yeah I mean you can already know because you see this code and you've probably learned by now that
blue is the first color that Python draws.
But imagine if I only showed you this plot and I told you that one coin is fair and the other coin is
biased.
Would you be able to guess which coin was fair and which coin was biased.
I think it would be basically impossible you would probably guess based on this plot that both of these
coins in fact are biased.
So the blue coin got heads 80 percent of the time and the yellow coin or the orange coin got tails 80
percent of the time.
Now that just happened to be that way.
You know we run it again and we're going to get different results.
But the larger point here that I want to illustrate is that even though there is a theoretical difference
in the probabilities.
Because we are randomly picking numbers because we are randomly drawing values from this distribution
with a relatively small number of trials in the experiment.
It's not necessarily obvious what the probabilities are.
So to really evaluate to be confident about a probability distribution you actually need to get a lot
of numbers.
That's something I'm going to talk about more in a later video in this section of the course.
But for now what I want to do is give you a little bit of an introduction into the pandas module.
So I'm going to write import pandas as PD.
So just like people often call num pi and P and map plot lived up pi plot BLT the common Li used shortcut
for pandas is PD.
So what I'm going to do is basically create a new pandas table of data or a way of storing data which
is often called a data frames.
I'm going to call this D for data frame.
So this is going to be PD.
That data frame and into this function I'm going to import the results that we already have generated.
So results and let's just stop at that and let's output D F and see what that looks like all right.
So you can see we have all the data here and it comes out as this nice interactive formatted table where
you see all the individual runs of the experiment and the two outcomes.
Now we know that this is supposed to be corresponding to two coins so this was the fair coin.
And this was the biased coin.
So therefore I want to actually change the names I want to give pandas names too to associate with these
two rows.
So I'm going to write index equals and then provide in the list the names of these two rows.
So fair and biased run this code again.
Now you can see that the numbers have stayed the same of course but now we get more meaningful labels
for these two rows.
Now there's one more thing I would like to change about the importing here and that is that you know
these numbers are not really like floating point numbers.
They correspond to the outcome of flipping a coin or a binary outcome.
So I'm going to change the data type from the default floating point to an integer so I will write D
type for data type equals int.
So now notice that these have changed into zeros and ones which year I'm calling tails and heads.
OK.
So now I would like to know how many heads were there for the fair coin and the biased coin or actually
maybe an average is better because the total number is going to depend on the total number of flips.
So let's say we want to create a new column here.
So this these columns correspond to all the individual flips.
I want to add a new column that corresponds to the average of all these other columns.
So the way we do that is by treating this data frame like a dictionary because it actually is basically
just a dictionary.
So I'm going to call this new column EV for average equals and then I want the average of all of these
other columns so I'm going to write DFS so the data frame and then I'm going to call a method that will
act on this data frame and that is the mean method and then we write access equals one because we want
to average over the columns not average over the rows this way.
Okay.
And then let's have a look at this data frame again.
All right.
So this was pretty interesting.
You see that the fair coin got heads and tails equally likely equally often.
So that is consistent with the true probability and the bias coin had 40 percent heads.
And that's also consistent with what I specified up here.
But now to show you that this is random I run this code again and let's see what this happens to be
here.
OK.
So now the fair coin actually gave heads only three times out of ten.
So only 30 percent of the time.
Again this illustrates that when you are running an experiment that involves random numbers in order
to see the true probabilities the true distributions you actually need to run many experiments and for
a case like this where you get a binary ization 10 is really not enough.
In this video I showed you how to create binary random distributions with different biases or different
probability distributions.
And I gave you a very quick introduction to the pend US data frame.
So this was about virtual coin tosses in the exercise for this video.
We are going to create a weighted die or weighted dice and then play around with those dice and random
numbers.
So have a quick break you know grab a glass of water whatever and come right back and get to the exercise
associated with this video.